1.Security vulnerabilities are any kind of software or hardware defect
2.exploit is the term used to describe a program written to take advantage of a known vulnerability
3.Software vulnerabilities are usually introduced by errors in the operating system or application code, despite all the effort companies put into finding and patching software vulnerabilities
4.2015, a major vulnerability, called SYNful Knock, was discovered in Cisco IOS
5.goal of software updates is to stay current and avoid exploitation of vulnerabilities
6.Hardware vulnerabilities are often introduced by hardware design flaws
7.Rowhammer exploit allows data to be retrieved from nearby address memory cells, even if the cells are protected.
8.Hardware vulnerabilities are specific to device models and are not generally exploited through random compromising attempts

Categorizing Security Vulnerabilities

  1.Buffer overflow 
  2.Non-validated input
  3.Race conditions 
  4.Weaknesses in security practices
  5.Access-control problems 
1.Buffer overflow – This vulnerability occurs when data is written beyond the limits of a buffer.

2.Non-validated input This data coming into the program could have malicious content, designed to force the program to behave in an unintended way

3.Race condition becomes a source of vulnerability when the required ordered or timed events do not occur in the correct order or proper timing.
4.Weaknesses in security practices – Systems and sensitive data can be protected through techniques such as authentication, authorization, and encryption
5.Access-control problems – Access control is the process of controlling who does what and ranges from managing physical access to equipment to dictating who has access to a resource


Types of Malware

1.Spyware –
 This malware is design to track and spy on the user. Spyware often includes activity trackers, keystroke collection, and data capture
2.Adware –
 Advertising supported software is designed to automatically deliver advertisements. 
3.Bot –
 From the word robot, a bot is malware designed to automatically perform action, usually online.
4.Ransomware –
 This malware is designed to hold a computer system or the data it contains captive until a payment is made.
5.Scareware 
forges pop-up windows that resemble operating system dialogue windows.
6.Rootkit –
 This malware is designed to modify the operating system to create a backdoor.
7.Virus 
- A virus is malicious executable code that is attached to other executable files, often legitimate programs
8.Trojan horse - 
A Trojan horse is malware that carries out malicious operations under the guise of a desired operation.
9.Worms –
 Worms are malicious code that replicate themselves by independently exploiting vulnerabilities in networks
10.Man-In-The-Middle (MitM)
 – MitM allows the attacker to take control over a device without the user’s knowledge
11.Man-In-The-Mobile (MitMo) 
– A variation of man-in-middle, MitMo is a type of attack used to take control over a mobile device

Symptoms of Malware

There is an increase in CPU usage.
There is a decrease in computer speed.
The computer freezes or crashes often.
There is a decrease in Web browsing speed.
There are unexplainable problems with network connections.
Files are modified.
Files are deleted.
There is a presence of unknown files, programs, or desktop icons.
There are unknown processes running.
Programs are turning off or reconfiguring themselves.
Email is being sent without the user’s knowledge or consent.

Social Engineering

Social engineering is an access attack that attempts to manipulate individuals into performing actions or divulging confidential information

Types of social engineering attacks:
1.Pretexting -
 This is when an attacker calls an individual and lies to them in an attempt to gain access to privileged data.
2. Tailgating - 
This is when an attacker quickly follows an authorized person into a secure location.
3.Something for Something (Quid pro quo)
 - This is when an attacker requests personal information from a party in exchange for something, like a free gift

Wi-Fi Password Cracking

Techniques used in password cracking
1.Social engineering
 – The attacker manipulates a person who knows the password into providing it.
2.Brute-force attacks – 
The attacker tries several possible passwords in an attempt to guess the password
example:Ophcrack, L0phtCrack, THC Hydra, RainbowCrack, and Medusa.
3.Network sniffing 
– By listening and capturing packets sent on the network, an attacker may be able to discover the password if the password is being sent unencrypted (in plain text)


Phishing 
is when a malicious party sends a fraudulent email disguised as being from a legitimate, trusted source. The message intent is to trick the recipient into installing malware on their device, or into sharing personal or financial information

Vulnerability Exploitation

Step 1.
 Gather information about the target system
Step 2.
One of the pieces of relevant information learned in step 1 might be the operating system, its version, and a list of services running on it.
Step 3.
 When the target’s operating system and version is known, the attacker looks for any known vulnerabilities specific to that version of OS or other OS services.
Step 4. 
When a vulnerability is found, the attacker looks for a previously written exploit to use.

Advanced Persistent Threats


One way in which infiltration is achieved is through advanced persistent threats (APTs). They consist of a multi-phase, long term, stealthy and advanced operation against a specific target.
APT’s purpose is to deploy customized malware on one or multiple of the target’s systems and remain undetected.

    DOS
Denial-of-Service (DoS) attacks are a type of network attack.

1.verwhelming Quantity of Traffic 
- This is when a network, host, or application is sent an enormous quantity of data at a rate which it cannot handle. This causes a slowdown in transmission or response, or a crash of a device or service.

2.Maliciously Formatted Packets - This is when a maliciously formatted packet is sent to a host or application and the receiver is unable to handle it